>>One thing do I teach of
my disciples-- suffering
and deliverance from suffering.
It was in this way that
Gautama, the Buddha,
living in the sixth
century BC, gave
the gist of his whole teaching.
And it's for this reason that
many commentators and critics
of Buddhism have called
it a way of escape,
because of its tremendous
concern with the problem
of human pain as the
fundamental problem of life
and the means of
deliverance from pain.
But I believe this is really
a very mistaken criticism,
because there is nothing that
is so much the very essence
of suffering as the fear
of suffering itself.
And if the doctrine
of the Buddha
were fundamentally
based on an obsession
to get rid of
suffering, it would
be a kind of self-contradictory
vicious circle.
This is very well illustrated by
another of those stories which
I tell from time to time, where
a student came to his master
with the question,
it is terribly hot,
and how shall we
escape the heat?
In other words, this
was a symbolic question
asking about the whole problem
of the heat of suffering.
It is terribly hot, and how
should we escape the heat?
And he answered, "Go right down
to the bottom of the furnace."
But in the furnace,
said the student,
how do we escape
the scorching fire?
And the master's final
word was, "No further pains
will harass you."
Now you might say then that
the attitude of the Buddhist
philosophy to suffer
is not at all one
of turning away
from it, of solving
the problem of suffering
by turning one's back on it
and escaping it.
Rather, its whole attitude
is that the solution
to the problem of human
pain, whether it be physical
or whether it be moral,
is to go right into it.
Now in the Buddhist
doctrine, pain or suffering
in its most general
sense is designated
by this word,
duhkha in Sanskrit.
Duhkha is the opposite of sukha.
And if you break the
word down, duh here
means what is disagreeable,
painful, bitter,
and kha means condition.
Su means what sweet.
So you might say
this is bitterness
in contrast with sweetness.
And the first proposition
of the Buddhist teaching,
what is called the first
of the four noble truths,
is the idea that life as we
live it is fundamentally duhkha,
fundamentally, a kind
of chronic frustration.
And man's effort is always to
get rid of this and go to that.
But the basic idea of the Buddha
was that if you have this,
you must have this,
because these two
contrast with each other.
You don't experience this
unless you experience this.
unless you've experienced this.
So if you go after sweetness,
you cannot experience sweetness
unless there is always as
its background the contrast
of bitterness.
And therefore, the objective
of the Buddha's doctrine
was not to get rid of pain
and put pleasure in its place,
but to go to something
else, which stands,
as it were, transcending
these two opposites, above
and beyond which in
Sanskrit is called ananda.
That word is usually
translated bliss,
but in a rather unusual sense.
There is a poem, again from
the tradition of Chinese zen,
which says under the
sword lifted high,
there is hell
making you tremble.
But go straight ahead.
And there is the land of bliss.
And so bliss here has
a very special meaning.
It isn't bliss in
contrast to agony.
And I think probably the best
way of translating the word
ananda is to use the
English word ecstasy.
Now then our problem
is simply this.
How is it that through a
profound going into suffering,
that is to say a profound
acceptance of it,
there can come out of
it some sort of bliss.
This is the problem
we have to understand.
A great deal of the doctrine
of primitive Buddhism
as we have it recorded from
the Buddha's own teachings
is concerned with
close attentiveness
to one's inner
feelings and states
of mind, a careful
watching of them
to find out what
they really are.
And supposing then
you're afraid.
What happens to you?
Many people when
asked this question
seem strangely unaware.
Their thoughts are concentrated
on the particular imagination
of the feared event happening.
In other words, the
person is afraid of having
a certain sickness,
disease, and he
keeps thinking of what it might
be like to have that disease.
But supposing we switch
our attention from that
and concentrate for a moment
on what it simply feels
like to be afraid.
We find, don't we, that we get
a kind of creepy feeling up
the spine.
We get a sort of sinking
or hollow feeling
in the pit of the stomach,
and a clammy sensation
in the palms of our hands.
Now as a matter of fact,
that's not really very painful,
and is it?
That's all that's
the matter with you.
And that's the worst that life
can do to you at that moment.
Furthermore, notice
something else.
That thing you have
what you call fear,
you have also precisely
the same sensations
that you have in a totally
opposite situation, when
you have what we call shudders
or thrills of delight.
They are the same shudders,
the same trembles,
sometimes even the same
creepy feeling up the spine,
the same sinking feeling
in the pit of the stomach,
that a very profound positive
emotional experience can
excite, so that we find
that our feelings depend
for their evaluation
as to whether they
be positive or
negative, very much
as to the context
in which they occur.
For example, say a father
is playing with his boy,
and he gives him a
slap on the behind.
The boy looks around and if
he sees an angry expression
on his father's
face, he feels hurt.
It was painful.
But if he sees his
father as laughing at him
and was just teasing him,
it doesn't hurt him at all.
And so it is with
all our sensations.
The way they impress us
positively or negatively,
as good or bad, depends
to a very large extent
on the context in
which they are set.
Take for example
in a poem like this
by the humorous
poet, Thomas Foote.
The poem says, "They
went and told the sexton,
and the sexton tolled the bell."
Now there's the same sound,
told, in either the case.
But its meaning is
completely different
because of the context
in which it occurs.
if the second line had
said, "And the sexton
told the minister,"
then it would
have had the same
meaning in both lines.
And just as words
change their meaning
in accordance with
their context,
so the meaning of what we
experience alters contextually.
And so it is this then, that
close awareness of our feelings
reveals.
In the same way, we can say
we weep when we are sad.
But we also weep for joy/ There
are tears of joy and tears
of sorrow.
Exactly the same tears, exactly
the same physical sensation,
but what a difference
the context makes.
And therefore, the
idea of the Buddha
was to become delivered from
suffering, not by running away
from it, but from looking at the
actual concrete reality of what
we feel and forgetting
the context.
Now of course, this is obviously
something quite possible
in the milder
forms of suffering.
But what happens when
suffering becomes really acute.
Perhaps, as an
illustration of this,
I might turn to a very
extraordinary work of art.
It is a sculpture of
Saint Teresa by Bernini.
Look at that face
and try and decide
what feeling that
face is expressing.
Is it agony?
Is it a rapture of delight,
which would, as we say,
cause one almost to swoon?
What is it?
Actually, if you look back
and see the whole scene,
you will see that the
saint is confronted
by an angel who is piercing
her with a dart, the dart
representing the divine love.
And so the figure represents
Saint Teresa in ecstasy,
in profound joy, profound
delight at the state,
the inner feeling of her
union with the godhead.
And this is exactly what is
meant by ananda, ecstasy,
for pleasure and pain in
their most intense forms,
both producing that
we could call ecstasy.
A very striking illustration
this has been given recently.
Some of you may have
heard of the work
of a British obstetrician by the
name of Grantly Dick-Read who
has many students among
obstetricians in this country.
For as you know, the
pains of childbirth
can be some of
the severest pains
that a human being can undergo.
And the point of
Dr. Read's work has
been to show that if
you change a woman's
attitude to the experience of
childbirth, if in other words
you stop calling
these feelings pain
and instead you
call them tensions,
and if before childbirth
you train her to relax,
to let go of herself,
and as it were,
cooperate with the tensions
that she's experiencing,
the whole character of
childbirth can be changed.
And many women
who have undergone
this pre-birth
training say afterwards
that what they
might have expected
to be an extremely unpleasant
experience turned out
to be a profoundly moving
experience, even a joyous one.
Now, of course it's pretty
clear that we could do something
like that when the context
of a painful experience
is very positive, as
it is with childbirth.
After all, this is
a creative event.
But wouldn't it be a
very different matter
in the case of the
pains of death.
Would it be possible,
for example,
to look upon the pains of
death as natural tensions,
and so have an entirely
different attitude.
I don't know why not.
After all, we fear death.
We have a negative attitude
to death, largely because
of social conditioning.
It's what we've been taught.
For example, just to
give another illustration
and then get back to
the subject of death,
the idea of being
sick, I mean vomiting,
is something which most of
us regard as disgusting.
But is it actually disgusting?
Don't we revolt with
the feeling of disgust
from it, because when
we were little children
and we were sick and we threw
up, our mamas went blah.
And we caught from them
the emotional attitude
toward that kind
of experience so
that it reverberates and
echoes with us ever afterwards.
Well, it's rather
the same with death,
because death is,
after all, beneficent.
If we never die, not only would
our world become hopelessly
overpopulated, not
only might we become
utterly bored with century
after century after century
of experience
without intermission,
we might crave death after
the first 500 years of life.
And never to be able
to have it would
be like the torture of a
chronic and fantastic insomnia.
So if death is fundamentally
merciful, if it is natural,
if it is something
that is just as
much an integral part of being
a human being as having a head
or having hands,
then would it not
be possible to have a
changed attitude to death
in any community or society,
so that in due course,
people could begin to look
upon the pain attending
death in the same
way as they could
be taught to look upon
the pain attending birth.
Now there's another
aspect of the problem,
and that is that a great
deal of our negative attitude
to the experience of pain,
and acute physical pain I'm
speak of now, is connected
with a certain culturally
conditioned
unwillingness to react
to pain in the natural way.
In other words, we
are afraid of giving
into suffering in the way
that our own physical organism
suggests to us.
We are afraid of crying.
We're afraid of screaming.
We're afraid of going into those
very undignified motions which
constitute the human
beings' reaction in pain.
Even though, as I
just pointed out,
we sometimes have the very same
reactions in acute pleasure.
But we are fundamentally
ashamed of pain,
because we are taught that
giving in to pain, weeping
or something like that,
is unmanly, sissy,
or something like that.
Now it's a very
dangerous doctrine,
that a human being
should always be
rigid in conditions
of suffering.
I often like to quote a passage
from that Chinese philosopher,
Lao Tzu, L-A-O T-Z-U, which
says, "Man at his birth
is supple and tender.
In death, he is rigid and hard.
Bounce when they are
young, are pliant and soft.
But when dead, they
are brittle and dry."
Thus tenderness and softness
are the companions of life.
But rigidity and hardness
are the companions of death.
In other words, there
is strength in weakness.
Consider a cat.
When a cat drops off a
tree, what does the cat do?
Does it go rigid?
Does it say, I'm going
to be a real tough guy
and beat the ground
without flinching?
Does the cat stick out
its feet like this?
No.
Because if it did,
when it hit the ground,
it would be just a
broken bag of bones.
When the cat's in
midair, it relaxes.
It goes with it.
It becomes weak.
And so it hits the ground
with a soft, heavy thud,
and is unharmed.
Think also of water.
Water was one of the basic
symbols of Lao Tzu's philosphy,
to be like water.
Nothing in the world is softer
or more yielding than water.
And yet at the
same time, nothing
is like water for
overcoming and wearing away
things which are
hard, like rocks.
And thus, if you put
a knife into water
and you try to cut
it, what happens?
The water gives
completely to the knife.
The water closes up
wherever the knife went.
And although you strike
at it as hard as you like,
you could never create a wound.
So it is, you see,
because of its softness
that the water triumphs over
the hardness of the knife.
So then it's the same
with human beings.
Unfortunately, we
are so brought up
to mistrust our natural
feeling reactions
to certain experiences.
We are conditioned to believe
that we will suffer less,
that we will somehow
triumph over pain,
if we hold our feelings rigid.
But you know, our reactions to
pain are in a way therapeutic.
They're healing,
just like fever.
When we have poisons
in our blood,
the natural defense
mechanisms of the body
send up our temperature,
and in this way,
boil out the invading bugs.
Now it used to be thought
that when people had fevers,
this was the disease.
The fever itself
was the disease.
And so once upon a
time, doctors used
to give medicine to
take away the fever.
But by taking away the
fever, they very often
killed the patient, because they
took away the defensive action
of the body to drive
out the disease.
And so in just the same
way, if one refuses
to react in the way of nature
to invasions of pain, so too,
one may shatter the body
beyond what it can stand.
It's the same thing, you know.
No bridge will stand
up unless it has give.
If a steel suspension
bridge is built so firmly
that it doesn't
sway in the wind,
that bridge will
come crashing down
on the first gale is
just because there's
give in it that the
bridge is strong.
Take a great building
like the Empire State.
The Empire State also
has a sway in it.
And if it didn't
have that sway, it
would be a very insecure
structure indeed.
So then, when we
are willing to react
to pain as our own
natural feelings suggest,
if we are willing to scream, if
we are willing to weep, if we
are willing to wriggle and
writhe as pain suggests
to us to do, a very
strange thing happens.
The very willingness
to react in that way
often makes it quite
unnecessary to do so.
Now you may say, I'm
just talking big.
And the only way I
can prove what I say
is the next time you have a
toothache, the next time you
have any serious pain, see
what happens if you do this.
If you, as it were,
go along with the pain
and don't try to fight
it, yield, become weak,
and you will discover
the strength in weakness.
So then you see,
this is not really
an escapist philosophy at all.
It is most definitely
a philosophy
of keeping in mind
the actual reality
of the situation in
which you find yourself.
I don't know what could be
more realistic than this, what
could be more fundamentally
facing the hard facts of life.
One keeps his attention on
the actual concrete fact
that is happening as
distinct from our socially
conditioned and inculcated
ideas and attitudes about it.
And this is really
facing reality 100%.
And so there come out of
this two basic results.
The first is that when
we don't resist pain,
we don't set up a vicious
circle in connection with it.
Take the pain of fear again.
Supposing you are a situation
where the doctor has told you
you have to have an operation.
And of course if
you're going to undergo
this operation in the best
way, you need to be rested.
You need to have
plenty of sleep.
You need to be
strong, and so on.
Well, fine advice, isn't it?
Because the moment
you know you've
got to have an operation, you're
liable to get a bit frightened.
And then you know you
ought not to be frightened.
You ought not to stay awake
at night to worry about it.
You need sleep.
Then you get afraid, you
see, because they're afraid.
You're afraid that
your fear is going
to lead to insomnia
and debility.
And so you're afraid
of being afraid.
And then because you see that
you are afraid of being afraid,
you are afraid because you are
afraid because you are afraid.
So that worry is always
a vicious circle,
in which you are worrying,
because you worry,
because you worry.
And this, as it were,
builds up a whole chain
of reactions, which makes
the pain or the fear
worse and worse and worse.
So then, if at any point in
this link, we can as it were,
be willing, be
willing to be worried.
And then you don't worry
about being worried.
Be willing to be afraid.
Then you don't have to be
afraid of being afraid.
And so this, in other words,
diminishes the total amount
of pain because it doesn't
allow the painful situation
to build itself up
and up and up and up.
In the same way, if somebody
stuck a hook into you,
and you pull away
from it, well the hook
goes more deeply into you.
But if you are caught
like a fish on a hook
and you go with the hook, this
reduces the amount of tension.
And this works backwards
all the way down the line.
Now there's also
a second result.
And that is that that when
our mind, our consciousness,
our attention, is
fully focused on
what is, on the actual
situation, as I said,
we are free from various
thoughts about it
and associations with it
that bring up a context which
makes the experience painful.
So you might say that this is
an attitude of taking things
as they come, one of time.
For example, many of you who
are not blessed with dishwashers
have to wash many
dishes day after day.
And when you've been married
as a woman for, oh, 10 or 11
years, one day you
are sitting there
at the sink, utterly
weary of the whole thing.
And in you mind's eye
comes the immense pile
of dishes which you've
had to watch day
after day in the past They
are, in your mind's eye,
standing up, piled forever and
ever on the draining board.
And also in your mind's eye is
that enormous pile of dishes
that you're going to have
to wash in the future.
And you think, my life
is that of a mere drudge,
washing dishes, washing
dishes, washing dishes.
And there's no end to it.
But if you were realistic,
you would see this.
You have only one dish to
wash in your life, this one.
You can only wash
one dish at a time.
And that's the only one
you have to deal with.
It's the same as
climbing a mountain.
If you start to think as you
climb, oh what a lot of steps
to take, then the task
becomes utterly impressive.
Or if, for example, you make
a New Year's resolution,
and you say, well I'm
going to go on the wagon.
I'm not going to drink
anymore this new year.
And if you say,
this whole year, I
will not touch
another drop of drink.
Well, of course the old
devil immediately brings
to your mind 365 days of not
drinking anything, anything
alcoholic.
And that's overwhelming.
Don't tempt the devil that way.
One conquers the problem
by not drinking this one,
and saying nothing
about the next.
So with the climbing
of the mountain,
taking each step as if it were
the only step to be taken,
and so in the
situation then where
there is the experience of
agony, whether it be physical
or whether it be moral,
the way out is in a way,
suffering that agony
as if this were
the only thing in
the whole world
to be done by going right down
to the bottom of the furnace.
No further pains will harass me.
It was also so, isn't it
in "Dante's Divine Comedy,"
when Dante and Virgil
find their way out of hell
by going down to the
very center of hell.
I like to illustrate this with
another of those zen stories.
There was a monk who got news
that his mother had died.
And he was weeping.
And another Buddhist
monk said to him,
you ought to be
ashamed of yourself.
You, a monk, still showing
worldly attachments by weeping.
He said, don't be silly.
I'm weeping because
I want to weep.